---
title: hydrate
---

<Deprecated>

This API will be removed in a future major version of React.

In React 18, `hydrate` was replaced by [`hydrateRoot`.](/reference/react-dom/client/hydrateRoot) Using `hydrate` in React 18 will warn that your app will behave as if it’s running React 17. Learn more [here.](https://reactjs.org/blog/2022/03/08/react-18-upgrade-guide.html#updates-to-client-rendering-apis)

</Deprecated>

<Intro>

`hydrate` lets you display React components inside a browser DOM node whose HTML content was previously generated by [`react-dom/server`](/reference/react-dom/server) in React 17 and below.

```js
hydrate(reactNode, domNode, callback?)
```

</Intro>

<InlineToc />

---

## Reference {/*reference*/}

### `hydrate(reactNode, domNode, callback?)` {/*hydrate*/}

Call `hydrate` in React 17 and below to “attach” React to existing HTML that was already rendered by React in a server environment.

```js
hydrate(reactNode, domNode);
```

React will attach to the HTML that exists inside the `domNode`, and take over managing the DOM inside it. An app fully built with React will usually only have one `hydrate` call with its root component.

[See more examples below.](#usage)

#### Parameters {/*parameters*/}

* `reactNode`: The "React node" used to render the existing HTML. This will usually be a piece of JSX like `<App />` which was rendered with a `ReactDOM Server` method such as `renderToString(<App />)` in React 17.

* `domNode`: A [DOM element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element) that was rendered as the root element on the server.

* **optional**: `callback`: A function. If passed, React will call it after your component is hydrated.

#### Returns {/*returns*/}

`hydrate` returns null.

#### Caveats {/*caveats*/}
* `hydrate` expects the rendered content to be identical with the server-rendered content. React can patch up differences in text content, but you should treat mismatches as bugs and fix them.
* In development mode, React warns about mismatches during hydration. There are no guarantees that attribute differences will be patched up in case of mismatches. This is important for performance reasons because in most apps, mismatches are rare, and so validating all markup would be prohibitively expensive.
* You'll likely have only one `hydrate` call in your app. If you use a framework, it might do this call for you.
* If your app is client-rendered with no HTML rendered already, using `hydrate()` is not supported. Use [render()](/reference/react-dom/render) (for React 17 and below) or [createRoot()](/reference/react-dom/client/createRoot) (for React 18+) instead.

---

## Usage {/*usage*/}

Call `hydrate` to attach a <CodeStep step={1}>React component</CodeStep> into a server-rendered <CodeStep step={2}>browser DOM node</CodeStep>.

```js [[1, 3, "document.getElementById('root')"], [2, 3, "<App />"]]
import {hydrate} from 'react-dom';

hydrate(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
````

Using `hydrate()` to render a client-only app (an app without server-rendered HTML) is not supported. Use [`render()`](/reference/react-dom/render) (in React 17 and below) or [`createRoot()`](/reference/react-dom/client/createRoot) (in React 18+) instead.

### Hydrating server-rendered HTML {/*hydrating-server-rendered-html*/}

In React, "hydration" is how React "attaches" to existing HTML that was already rendered by React in a server environment. During hydration, React will attempt to attach event listeners to the existing markup and take over rendering the app on the client.

In apps fully built with React, **you will usually only hydrate one "root", once at startup for your entire app**.

<Sandpack>

```html public/index.html
<!--
  HTML content inside <div id="root">...</div>
  was generated from App by react-dom/server.
-->
<div id="root"><h1>Hello, world!</h1></div>
```

```js index.js active
import './styles.css';
import {hydrate} from 'react-dom';
import App from './App.js';

hydrate(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
```

```js App.js
export default function App() {
  return <h1>Hello, world!</h1>;
}
```

</Sandpack>

Usually you shouldn't need to call `hydrate` again or to call it in more places. From this point on, React will be managing the DOM of your application. If you want to update the UI, your components can do this by [using state.](/reference/react/useState)

For more information on hydration, see the docs for [`hydrateRoot`.](/reference/react-dom/client/hydrateRoot)

---

### Suppressing unavoidable hydration mismatch errors {/*suppressing-unavoidable-hydration-mismatch-errors*/}

If a single element’s attribute or text content is unavoidably different between the server and the client (for example, a timestamp), you may silence the hydration mismatch warning.

To silence hydration warnings on an element, add `suppressHydrationWarning={true}`:

<Sandpack>

```html public/index.html
<!--
  HTML content inside <div id="root">...</div>
  was generated from App by react-dom/server.
-->
<div id="root"><h1>Current Date: 01/01/2020</h1></div>
```

```js index.js
import './styles.css';
import {hydrate} from 'react-dom';
import App from './App.js';

hydrate(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
```

```js App.js active
export default function App() {
  return (
    <h1 suppressHydrationWarning={true}>
      Current Date: {new Date().toLocaleDateString()}
    </h1>
  );
}
```

</Sandpack>

This only works one level deep, and is intended to be an escape hatch. Don’t overuse it. Unless it’s text content, React still won’t attempt to patch it up, so it may remain inconsistent until future updates.

---

### Handling different client and server content {/*handling-different-client-and-server-content*/}

If you intentionally need to render something different on the server and the client, you can do a two-pass rendering. Components that render something different on the client can read a [state variable](/reference/react/useState) like `isClient`, which you can set to `true` in an [effect](/reference/react/useEffect):

<Sandpack>

```html public/index.html
<!--
  HTML content inside <div id="root">...</div>
  was generated from App by react-dom/server.
-->
<div id="root"><h1>Is Server</h1></div>
```

```js index.js
import './styles.css';
import {hydrate} from 'react-dom';
import App from './App.js';

hydrate(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
```

```js App.js active
import { useState, useEffect } from "react";

export default function App() {
  const [isClient, setIsClient] = useState(false);

  useEffect(() => {
    setIsClient(true);
  }, []);

  return (
    <h1>
      {isClient ? 'Is Client' : 'Is Server'}
    </h1>
  );
}
```

</Sandpack>

This way the initial render pass will render the same content as the server, avoiding mismatches, but an additional pass will happen synchronously right after hydration.

<Pitfall>

This approach makes hydration slower because your components have to render twice. Be mindful of the user experience on slow connections. The JavaScript code may load significantly later than the initial HTML render, so rendering a different UI immediately after hydration may also feel jarring to the user.

</Pitfall>
