---
title: hydrate
---
<Gotcha>

In React 18, `hydrate` was replaced by [`hydrateRoot`](/apis/react-dom/client/createRoot). Using `hydrate` in React 18 will warn that your app will behave as if it’s running React 17. Learn more [here](https://reactjs.org/blog/2022/03/08/react-18-upgrade-guide.html#updates-to-client-rendering-apis).

</Gotcha>

<Intro>

`hydrate` lets you display React components inside a browser DOM node whose HTML content was previously generated by [`react-dom/server`](/apis/react-dom/server) in React 17 and below.

```js
hydrate(reactNode, domNode, callback?)
```

</Intro>

- [Usage](#usage)
    - [Hydrating server-rendered HTML](#hydrating-server-rendered-html)
- [Reference](#reference)
    - [`hydrateRoot(domNode, reactNode, options?)`](#hydrate-root)
    - [`root.render(reactNode)`](#render-root)
    - [`root.unmount()`](#unmount-root)

---

## Usage {/*usage*/}

Call `hydrate` to attach a <CodeStep step={1}>React component</CodeStep> into a server-rendered <CodeStep step={2}>browser DOM node</CodeStep>.

```js [[1, 3, "document.getElementById('root')"], [2, 3, "<App />"]]
import {hydrate} from 'react-dom';

hydrate(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
````

Using `hydrate()` to render a client-only app (an app without server-rendered HTML) is not supported. Use [`render()`](/apis/react-dom/render) (in React 17 and below) or [`createRoot()`](/apis/react-dom/client/createRoot) (in React 18+) instead.

### Hydrating server-rendered HTML {/*hydrating-server-rendered-html*/}

In React, "hydration" is how React "attaches" to existing HTML that was already rendered by React in a server environment. During hydration, React will attempt to attach event listeners to the existing markup and take over rendering the app on the client.

In apps fully built with React, **you will usually only hydrate one "root", once at startup for your entire app**.

<Sandpack>

```html public/index.html
<!--
  HTML content inside <div id="root">...</div>
  was generated from App by react-dom/server.
-->
<div id="root"><h1>Hello, world!</h1></div>
```

```js index.js active
import './styles.css';
import {hydrate} from 'react-dom';
import App from './App.js';

hydrate(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
```

```js App.js
export default function App() {
  return <h1>Hello, world!</h1>;
}
```

</Sandpack>

Usually you shouldn't need to call `hydrate` again or to call it in more places. From this point on, React will be managing the DOM of your application. If you want to update the UI, your components can do this by [using state](/apis/react/useState).

For more information on hydration, see the docs for [`hydrateRoot`](/apis/react-dom/client/hydrateRoot).

---

## Reference {/*reference*/}

### `hydrate(reactNode, domNode, options?)` {/*hydrate-root*/}

Call `hydrate` in React 17 and below to “attach” React to existing HTML that was already rendered by React in a server environment.

```js
hydrate(reactNode, domNode);
```

React will attach to the HTML that exists inside the `domNode`, and take over managing the DOM inside it. An app fully built with React will usually only have one `hydrate` call with its root component.

[See examples above.](#usage)

#### Parameters {/*parameters*/}

* `reactNode`: The "React node" used to render the existing HTML. This will usually be a piece of JSX like `<App />` which was rendered with a `ReactDOM Server` method such as `renderToString(<App />)` in React 17.

* `domNode`: A [DOM element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element) that was rendered as the root element on the server.

#### Returns {/*returns*/}

`hydrateRoot` returns null.

#### Caveats {/*caveats*/}
* `hydrate()` expects the rendered content to be identical with the server-rendered content. React can patch up differences in text content, but you should treat mismatches as bugs and fix them.
* In development mode, React warns about mismatches during hydration. There are no guarantees that attribute differences will be patched up in case of mismatches. This is important for performance reasons because in most apps, mismatches are rare, and so validating all markup would be prohibitively expensive.
* You'll likely have only one `hydrateRoot` call in your app. If you use a framework, it might do this call for you.
* If your app is client-rendered with no HTML rendered already, using `hydrateRoot()` is not supported. Use [createRoot()](/apis/createRoot) instead.

---
